prep release: v2.1.0 (#7109)
apollographql/router: CHANGELOG.md

By [@rregitsky](https://github.com/rregitsky) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6998

### feat: Introduce PQ Manifest `hot_reload` option for local manifests ([PR #6987](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6987))

This change introduces a [`persisted_queries.hot_reload` configuration option](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/graphos/routing/security/persisted-queries#hot_reload) to allow the router to hot reload local PQ manifest changes.

If you configure `local_manifests`, you can set `hot_reload` to `true` to automatically reload manifest files whenever they change. This lets you update local manifest files without restarting the router.

```yaml
persisted_queries:
  enabled: true
  local_manifests:
    - ./path/to/persisted-query-manifest.json
  hot_reload: true
```

Note: This change explicitly does _not_ piggyback on the existing `--hot-reload` flag.

By [@trevor-scheer](https://github.com/trevor-scheer) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6987

### Metrics for value completion errors ([PR #6905](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6905))

> When Router encounters a value completion error, it is not included in the GraphQL errors array, making it harder to observe. To surface this issue in a more obvious way, Router now counts value completion error metrics via the metric instruments `apollo.router.graphql.error` and `apollo.router.operations.error`, distinguishable via the `code` attribute with value `RESPONSE_VALIDATION_FAILED`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the router encounters a value completion error, it is not included in the GraphQL errors array, making it harder to observe. To surface this issue in a more obvious way, router now counts value completion error metrics via the metric instruments `apollo.router.graphql.error` and `apollo.router.operations.error`, distinguishable via the `code` attribute with value `RESPONSE_VALIDATION_FAILED`.
```

In 2.0.0, an experimental metric `telemetry.apollo.errors.experimental_otlp_error_metrics` was introduced to track errors with additional attributes. A few related changes are included here:

- Sending these metrics now also respects the subgraph's `send` flag e.g. `telemetry.apollo.errors.subgraph.[all|(subgraph name)].send`.
- A new configuration option `telemetry.apollo.errors.subgraph.[all|(subgraph name)].redaction_policy` has been added. This flag only applies when `redact` is set to `true`. When set to `ErrorRedactionPolicy.Strict`, error redaction will behave as it has in the past. Setting this to `ErrorRedactionPolicy.Extended` will allow the `extensions.code` value from subgraph errors to pass through redaction and be sent to Studio.
- A warning about incompatibility of error telemetry with connectors will be suppressed when this feature is enabled, since it _does_ support connectors when using the new mode.

By [@timbotnik](https://github.com/timbotnik) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6966

### Add router config validate subcommand ([PR #7016](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/7016))

> Added new `router config validate` subcommand to allow validation of a Router config file without fully starting up the Router.

Reviewer: Also use naming convention of lower case `router`

```suggestion
Adds new `router config validate` subcommand to allow validation of a router config file without fully starting up the router.
```

    sources:
      connector-graph.random_person_api:
        global_rate_limit:
          capacity: 20
          interval: 1s
        experimental_http2: http2only
        timeout: 1s
```

By [@andrewmcgivery](https://github.com/andrewmcgivery) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6737

### Add apollo.router.pipelines metrics ([PR #6967](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6967))

When the Router reloads either via schema change or config change a new request pipeline is created.
Existing request pipelines are closed once their requests finish. However, this may not happen if there are ongoing long requests 
such as Subscriptions that do not finish.

To enable debugging when request pipelines are being kept around a new gauge metric has been added:

- `apollo.router.pipelines` - The number of request pipelines active in the router
    - `schema.id` - The Apollo Studio schema hash associated with the pipeline.
    - `launch.id` - The Apollo Studio launch id associated with the pipeline (optional).
    - `config.hash` - The hash of the configuration

By [@BrynCooke](https://github.com/BrynCooke) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6967

> ### Update JWKS handling ([PR #6930](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6930))

Reviewer 2: I don't know really understand the difference between JWKs and JWTs, but the docs below talk about JWTs - so I assume that's what should be in the header.
```suggestion
### Update JWT handling ([PR #6930](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6930))
```

This PR updates JWT-handling in the `AuthenticationPlugin`;

> - JWT-related code has been moved around a bit for organizational purposes
> - Users may now set a new a new config option `config.authentication.router.jwt.on_error`. When set to the default `Error`, JWT-related errors will be returned to users (the current behavior.) When set to `Continue`, JWT errors will instead be ignored. When a JWT error is encountered, JWT claims will not be set in the request context.
> - When JWTs are processed, whether processing fails or succeeds, request context will contain a new variable `apollo::authentication::jwt_status` which notes the result of processing.
> - I applied a few lints that RustRover highlighted.

Reviewer 2: Removed non-user-facing information, broke up long line into bullets to make scanning easier
```suggestion
- Users may now set a new config option `config.authentication.router.jwt.on_error`.
  - When set to the default `Error`, JWT-related errors will be returned to users (the current behavior). 
  - When set to `Continue`, JWT errors will instead be ignored, and JWT claims will not be set in the request context.
- When JWTs are processed, whether processing succeeds or fails, the request context will contain a new variable `apollo::authentication::jwt_status` which notes the result of processing.
```

By [@Velfi](https://github.com/Velfi) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6930

> ### Support to get/set URI scheme in Rhai ([Issue #6897](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/6897))

Reviewer 2: Sentence-ify
```suggestion
### Add support to get/set URI scheme in Rhai ([Issue #6897](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/6897))
```

This adds support to read the scheme from the `request.uri.scheme`/`request.subgraph.uri.scheme` functions in Rhai, 
enabling the ability to switch between http and https for subgraph fetches. For example:

```rs
fn subgraph_service(service, subgraph){
    service.map_request(|request|{

>         log_info(``);

Author: Our changeset script automatically templatized a thing here and swallowed it (Rhai and Changesets both use the same thing!)

```suggestion
        log_info(`${request.subgraph.uri.scheme}`);
```

> This adds support to read the scheme from the `request.uri.scheme`/`request.subgraph.uri.scheme` functions in Rhai, 
> enabling the ability to switch between http and https for subgraph fetches. For example:

Reviewer 2: Mention that scheme is writeable as well
```suggestion
This adds support to read and write the scheme from the `request.uri.scheme`/`request.subgraph.uri.scheme` functions in Rhai, 
enabling the ability to switch between `http` and `https` for subgraph fetches. For example:
```

        if request.subgraph.uri.scheme == {} {
            log_info("Scheme is not explicitly set");
        }
        request.subgraph.uri.scheme = "https"
        request.subgraph.uri.host = "api.apollographql.com";
        request.subgraph.uri.path = "/api/graphql";
        request.subgraph.uri.port = 1234;
        log_info(``);
    });
}
```
By [@starJammer](https://github.com/starJammer) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6906

### Add `apollo.router.open_connections` metric ([PR #7023](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/7023))

> To help users to diagnose when connections are keeping pipelines hanging around the following metric has been added:

Reviewer 2: Commas for easy readability
```suggestion
To help users to diagnose when connections are keeping pipelines hanging around, the following metric has been added:
```

- `apollo.router.open_connections` - The number of request pipelines active in the router
    - `schema.id` - The Apollo Studio schema hash associated with the pipeline.
    - `launch.id` - The Apollo Studio launch id associated with the pipeline (optional).
    - `config.hash` - The hash of the configuration.
    - `server.address` - The address that the router is listening on.
    - `server.port` - The port that the router is listening on if not a unix socket.
    - `http.connection.state` - Either `active` or `terminating`.

> Connections can be held open by clients via keepalive or even just a long-running request, so it's useful to know when this is happening.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use this metric to monitor when connections are open via long running requests or keepalive messages. 
```

By [@bryncooke](https://github.com/bryncooke) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/7023

> ### Add configuration option to limit maximum batch size ([PR #7005](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/7005))

Reviewer 2: Actually say what the full name of the option is:
```suggestion
### Add `batching.maximum_size` configuration option to limit maximum client batch size ([PR #7005](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/7005))
```

Add an optional `maximum_size` parameter to the batching configuration.

* When specified, the router will reject requests which contain more than `maximum_size` queries in the client batch.
* When unspecified, the router performs no size checking (the current behavior).

If the number of queries provided exceeds the maximum batch size, the entire batch fails with error code 422 (
`Unprocessable Content`). For example:

```json
{
  "errors": [
    {
      "message": "Invalid GraphQL request",
      "extensions": {
        "details": "Batch limits exceeded: you provided a batch with 3 entries, but the configured maximum router batch size is 2",
        "code": "BATCH_LIMIT_EXCEEDED"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

By [@carodewig](https://github.com/carodewig) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/7005

> ### WIP: Connectors with TLS ([PR #6995](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6995))

Author: @andrewmcgivery I think this was accidentally WIP'd?

> ### TLS configuration for connectors ([PR #6995](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6995))

Reviewer 2: Sentence-ify
```suggestion
### Support TLS configuration for connectors ([PR #6995](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6995))
```

Connectors now supports TLS configuration for using custom certificate authorities and utilizing client certificate authentication.

```
tls:
  connector:
    sources:
      connector-graph.random_person_api:
        certificate_authorities: 
        client_authentication:
          certificate_chain: 
          key: 
```

By [@andrewmcgivery](https://github.com/andrewmcgivery) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6995

> ### Enable Remote Proxy Downloads

Reviewer 2: Casing & clarification
```suggestion
### Enable remote proxy downloads of the Router
```

> This enables users without direct download access to specify a remote proxy mirror location for the github download of

Reviewer 2: GitHub casing
```suggestion
This enables users without direct download access to specify a remote proxy mirror location for the GitHub download of
```

the Apollo Router releases.

By [@LongLiveCHIEF](https://github.com/LongLiveCHIEF) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6667

> ### Span events for traces containing errors ([PR #6727](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6727))

Reviewer 2: More specificity on which plugins have changed
```suggestion
### Add span events to error spans for connectors and demand control plugin ([PR #6727](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6727))
```

> We have added new span events to trace spans that include some errors. These span events include the GraphQL error code that relates to the error. So far this only includes errors generated by connectors and the demand control plugin.

Reviewer 2: Clarification
```suggestion
New span events have been added to trace spans which include errors. These span events include the GraphQL error code that relates to the error. So far, this only includes errors generated by connectors and the demand control plugin.
```

By [@bonnici](https://github.com/bonnici) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6727

## 🐛 Fixes

> ### fix: export gauge instruments ([Issue #6859](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/6859))

Reviewer 2: Remove leading `fix`
```suggestion
### Export gauge instruments ([Issue #6859](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/6859))
```

> In router 2.x, you can use the router's OTel `meter_provider()` to report metrics from Rust plugins.
> 
> Gauge instruments, such as those created using `.u64_gauge()`, were previously not exported. Now they are.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously in router 2.x, when using the router's OTel `meter_provider()` to report metrics from Rust plugins, gauge instruments such as those created using `.u64_gauge()` weren't exported. The router now exports these instruments.
```

By [@yanns](https://github.com/yanns) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6865

> ### Use batch_processor config for Apollo metrics PeriodicReader ([PR #7024](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/7024))

Reviewer 2: Code backticks
```suggestion
### Use `batch_processor` config for Apollo metrics `PeriodicReader` ([PR #7024](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/7024))
```

> The Apollo otlp `batch_processor` configurations `telemetry.apollo.batch_processor.scheduled_delay` and `telemetry.apollo.batch_processor.max_export_timeout` now also control the Apollo otlp `PeriodicReader` export interval and timeout respectively. This brings parity between Apollo otlp metrics and [non-Apollo otlp Exporter metrics](https://github.com/apollographql/router/blob/0f88850e0b164d12c14b1f05b0043076f21a3b28/apollo-router/src/plugins/telemetry/metrics/otlp.rs#L37-L40)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Apollo OTLP `batch_processor` configurations `telemetry.apollo.batch_processor.scheduled_delay` and `telemetry.apollo.batch_processor.max_export_timeout` now also control the Apollo OTLP `PeriodicReader` export interval and timeout, respectively. This update brings parity between Apollo OTLP metrics and [non-Apollo OTLP exporter metrics](https://github.com/apollographql/router/blob/0f88850e0b164d12c14b1f05b0043076f21a3b28/apollo-router/src/plugins/telemetry/metrics/otlp.rs#L37-L40)
```

> The Apollo otlp `batch_processor` configurations `telemetry.apollo.batch_processor.scheduled_delay` and `telemetry.apollo.batch_processor.max_export_timeout` now also control the Apollo otlp `PeriodicReader` export interval and timeout respectively. This brings parity between Apollo otlp metrics and [non-Apollo otlp Exporter metrics](https://github.com/apollographql/router/blob/0f88850e0b164d12c14b1f05b0043076f21a3b28/apollo-router/src/plugins/telemetry/metrics/otlp.rs#L37-L40)

Reviewer 2: Trailing period:
```suggestion
The Apollo otlp `batch_processor` configurations `telemetry.apollo.batch_processor.scheduled_delay` and `telemetry.apollo.batch_processor.max_export_timeout` now also control the Apollo otlp `PeriodicReader` export interval and timeout respectively. This brings parity between Apollo otlp metrics and [non-Apollo otlp Exporter metrics](https://github.com/apollographql/router/blob/0f88850e0b164d12c14b1f05b0043076f21a3b28/apollo-router/src/plugins/telemetry/metrics/otlp.rs#L37-L40).
```

By [@rregitsky](https://github.com/rregitsky) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/7024

> ### Reduce Brotli compression level ([Issue #6857](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/6857))

Reviewer 2: Clarification
```suggestion
### Reduce Brotli encoding compression level ([Issue #6857](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/6857))
```

> The current Brotli compression level used is `11`, which is the highest quality (and slowest). The value has been
> changed to `4`
> to mimic the other compression algorithms' `fast` setting; it is also a much more reasonable value for dynamic
> workloads.

Reviewer 2: Clarification
```suggestion
The Brotli encoding compression level has been changed from `11` to `4` to improve performance and
mimic other compression algorithms' `fast` setting. This value is also a much more reasonable value for dynamic
workloads.
```

By [@carodewig](https://github.com/carodewig) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/7007

> ### Fix CPU Count for cgroup environments

Reviewer 2: Include PR in title
```suggestion
### Fix CPU count for `cgroup` environments ([PR #6787](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6787))
```

> This fixes an issue where the fleet_detector plugin would not infer correctly the CPU limits for a system used cgroup2 or cgroup.

Reviewer 2: Clarification
```suggestion
This fixes an issue where the `fleet_detector` plugin would not correctly infer the CPU limits for a system which used `cgroup` or `cgroup2`.
```

By [@nmoutschen](https://github.com/nmoutschen) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6787

> ### Do not include other fields from representation variable than the entity keys for entity cache([Issue #6673](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/6673))

Reviewer 2: I _think_ this is what was meant by this title, but could be wrong - would like validation
```suggestion
### Separate entity keys and representation variables in entity cache key ([Issue #6673](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/6673))
```

Author: Hmm, that's a _great_ question.  I'll need to have @bnjjj and @SimonSapin chime in because it's a bit unclear to me, too.  Here's my take:

```suggestion
### Exclude non-entity keys during normalization in entity caching ([Issue #6673](https://github.com/apollographql/router/issues/6673))
```

> Separate entity keys and representation variable value in the cache key to avoid issues with `@requires` for example.
> 
> close #6673

Reviewer 2: Remove `close` tag line, sentence-ify
```suggestion
This fix separates the entity keys and representation variable values in the cache key, to avoid issues with `@requires` for example.
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
>
> If you have enabled [Distributed query plan caching](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/router/configuration/distributed-caching/#distributed-query-plan-caching), this release contains changes which necessarily alter the hashing algorithm used for the cache keys.  On account of this, you should anticipate additional cache regeneration cost when updating between these versions while the new hashing algorithm comes into service.

By [@bnjjj](https://github.com/bnjjj) in https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6888

> ### Replace Rhai specific hot-reload functionality with general hot-reload ([PR #6950](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6950))

Reviewer 2: Clarification
```suggestion
### Replace Rhai-specific hot-reload functionality with general hot-reload ([PR #6950](https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/6950))
```

> In Router 2.0 the rhai hot-reload capability was not working. The cause was the architectural improvements to the router which meant that the entire service stack is no longer re-created for each request.

Reviewer 2: Consistent tense
```suggestion
In Router 2.0 the rhai hot-reload capability was not working. This was because of architectural improvements to the router which meant that the entire service stack was no longer re-created for each request.
```
